---
title: Join in SQL
author: Tao He
date: 2017-09-11
tags: [SQL]
category: Database
layout: post
---

`join` is a kind of SQL operation in relational algebra, combining columns cross tables.

<!--more-->

Semantics of Join
-----------------

The ANSI-standard SQL specifies five different types of `join` operations: `INNER`, `LEFT OUTER`,
`RIGHT OUTER`, `FULL OUTER` and `CROSS`.

+ Cross Join

    - Cross join returns the _Cartesian product_ of matched rows from two tables.
    - Syntax: `select * from TA cross join TB [where pred]`
    - Explanation:

      $$[ ra .. rb | ra \leftarrow TA, rb \leftarrow TB | pred(ra, rb) ]$$

+ Inner Join

    - Inner join requires each row in the two joined tables to have matching column values. The query
      compares each row of A and B to find all pairs of rows that satisfy the join predicate.
    - Syntax: `select * from TA inner join TB on matchpred`
    - Explanation:

      $$[ ra .. rb | ra \leftarrow TA, rb \leftarrow TB | matchpred(ra, rb) ]$$

    - Implementation: the result of inner join can be seen as filter the result set of cross join
      (_Cartesian product_). Actually SQL implementations normally use other more efficient approaches:

      + hash join: apply a hash function to the join attribute.
      + sort-merge join: first sort the rows by the join attribute.

+ Outer Join

    - Outer join retains each matched rows from table, event if no corresponding matching row exists. Outer
      join subdivide further into left outer joins, right outer joins and full outer joins, depending on which
      table's rows to retain.
    - The corresponding columns are `NULL` if no matching row exists for a row in result set.
    - Syntax: `select * from TA (left/right/full) outer join TB on matchpred`
    - Explanation:

      $$[ (ra .. rb) \texttt{or} (ra .. NULL) | ra \leftarrow TA, rb \leftarrow TB | matchpred(ra, rb) ]$$

    - In SQLite, only _left_ outer join is supported currently.

Optimize Join in OLAP
---------------------

### Join as Map

Under certain circumstances, for example in Spark, the SQL operation are executed in a distributed manner.
The `join` operation will trigger _shuffle_. When there exists some level of *data skew*, where a lot of
data records shared the same key,  the shuffle may route those data to a single worker, leading to out of
memory error, or long-tail problem.

When one of the operands of `join` is fairly small than another one, the `join` operation could be transformed
as a `map` operation. First, create a _broadcast variable_ to transfer the smaller RDD to every nodes, then
use a custom `map` operation (`filter` may also be involved) to gain the same outcome of the original `join`
request.
